feat: Introduce aw-tauri (#34)
ActivityWatch/activitywatch.github.io: _posts/2024-05-5-introducing-tauri.md

---
layout: post
title: Tauri the future of ActivityWatch
date: 2024-5-5 16:35 +0300
author: "Brian Vuku"
author_twitter: "subrupt"
---

We're excited to introduce a new project [aw-tauri](http://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-tauri). Aw-Tauri is a lighter, faster cross-platform repackaging of ActivityWatch. As the name implies the project is built with [Tauri](https://Tauri.app), a relatively new toolkit that offers all the benefits of electron with none of the downsides!

## Why Tauri

Tauri apps are lightweight, memory efficient and secure by design. Tauri does not ship a renderer but uses the platform native renderer via webviews. This simple design choice makes the app size compact and memory efficient during runtime, as compared to electron apps. Tauri apps are secure, only interacting with the host systems through tauri apis. This protects the host computer from arbitary code execution (at least in theory).

## Developer Experience

Aw-tauri is built with the [rust server](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-server-rust) serving the backend and a UI written in Vue. It takes almost no time to get upto speed with the project!

> Cross platform development before tauri was a hassle. Binaries had to be built and tested for each target platform separately. Tauri greatly simplifies this.

Author: Yeah, you could write that bit... I'll add you as a co-author in the credits. I also considered showing the makefiles for before and after. Just how much easier it is to set up with Tauri. Might make the post too long Idk.

Tauri enables us to generate releases from the same codebase through a CI/CD pipeline. It handles everything platform specific, on linux you get a lightweight ```.appimage```, on windows a ```.msi``` installer and ```.app``` on macos. It just works!

## User Experience

> Aw-Tauri aims to consolidate most of the functionality that is offered by additional code by other repos. It integrates the window and afk watchers natively. It offers support of notifications by default via [aw-notify](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-notify). It houses its own webview, no need to visit ```http:localhost:5600``` anymore. Watchers can be started and stopped right from the trayicon. Updates can be pushed seemlessly across platforms provided by tauri's update system!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
aw-tauri aims to replace the current main application `aw-qt`, which appears as a tray icon and manages the server and watcher. It also houses its own webview, so no need to visit ```http://localhost:5600``` anymore!

We also plan to reimplement the [aw-notify](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-notify) module directly in aw-tauri, enabling users to set up configurable usage notifications (such as goals or alerts). 

Tauri also offers an update system, which we are excited to try.
```

## Conclusion

> Aw-Tauri is still in active development and contributions are welcome and encouraged. More eyes on the code will be beneficial to the project. We are excited to see where this project goes and how it will shape the future of ActivityWatch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`aw-tauri` is still in active development and contributions are welcome and encouraged! More eyes on the code will be beneficial to the project.

We are hopeful that it will help solve many of our outstanding challenges, and are excited to see it shape the future of ActivityWatch.
```

---
layout: post
title: Tauri the future of ActivityWatch
date: 2024-5-5 16:35 +0300
author: "Brian Vuku"
author_twitter: "subrupt"
---

We're excited to introduce a new initiative [`aw-tauri`](http://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-tauri), which is a lighter, faster cross-platform repackaging of ActivityWatch. As the name implies the project is built with [Tauri](https://tauri.app), a relatively new Rust-based toolkit that enables easy development of small, fast, and secure applications with a great developer experience.

## Why Tauri

Tauri apps are lightweight, memory efficient and secure by design. Tauri does not ship a renderer but uses the platform native renderer via webviews. This simple design choice makes the app size compact and memory efficient during runtime, as compared to electron apps. Tauri apps are secure, only interacting with the host systems through tauri apis. Security is a top priority for Tauri, and so it is for ActivityWatch.

## Developer Experience

> Aw-tauri is built with the [rust server](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-server-rust) serving the backend and a UI written in Vue. It takes almost no time to get upto speed with the project!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`aw-tauri` is built with [aw-server-rust](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-server-rust) serving the backend together with [aw-webui](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-webui). We have taken care to keep the codebase lean and clean, such that it takes very little time to get acquainted with the codebase.
```

> Cross platform development before tauri was a hassle. Binaries had to be built and tested for each target platform separately. Tauri greatly simplifies this.
> 
> Tauri enables us to generate releases from the same codebase with a single command. It handles everything platform specific: on Linux you get a lightweight `.AppImage`, on windows a `.msi` installer, and `.app` on macOS. It just works!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In our current build process, we rely heavily on PyInstaller for building the modules written in Python. This has been an enduring source of problems, and many developer weeks (if not months) have been spent trying to work out all the issues over the years (especially macOS support, because of the need to codesign a very messy `.app` bundle).

With Tauri, they have handled most of the heavy lifting, and make it easy to produce working binaries for all target platforms. Much of this is simply due to Rust (avoids PyInstaller), but the added tooling for codesigning and producing suitable bundles for each platform: on Linux you get a lightweight `.AppImage`, on windows a `.msi` installer, and `.app` on macOS.
```

## User Experience

> Aw-Tauri aims to consolidate most of the functionality that is offered by additional code by other repos. It integrates the window and afk watchers natively. It offers support of notifications by default via [aw-notify](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-notify). It houses its own webview, no need to visit ```http://localhost:5600``` anymore. Watchers can be started and stopped right from the trayicon. Updates can be pushed seemlessly across platforms provided by tauri's update system! [Aw-sync](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-server-rust/tree/c056e50646b45070c330de8a6dbd14042b3455e4/aw-sync) which is still in active development will be integrated into the app. Syncing data across devices will be just as seemless. We will work closely with the user community to make a product that we all love to use.

Reviewer: I split this into a bulletlist and made some changes:

```suggestion
`aw-tauri` aims to consolidate much of the functionality that is currently implemented in `aw-qt`, `aw-server-rust`, and `aw-notify`.

 - It houses its own webview, no need to visit `http://localhost:5600` in your browser anymore.
 - Watchers can be started and stopped right from the trayicon, just like in `aw-qt`.
 - Updates can be pushed seemlessly across platforms provided by tauri's update system!
 - [aw-sync](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-server-rust/tree/master/aw-sync), which is still in active development, will be integrated into the app. Syncing data across devices will be just as seamless.

These are only the first steps to getting aw-tauri usable, but most of all it serves as a stable foundation enabling many improvements down the line.
```

---

I removed this:

> It integrates the window and afk watchers natively.

Not really true, we still rely on Python watchers for cross-platform compatibility (no cross-platform Rust watcher, yet).

## Conclusion

> `aw-tauri` is still in active development and contributions are welcome and encouraged! More eyes on the code will be beneficial to the project.
> 
> We are hopeful that it will help solve many of our outstanding challenges, and are excited to see it shape the future of ActivityWatch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`aw-tauri` is still in active development, contributions are welcome and encouraged!

Check out the [README](https://github.com/ActivityWatch/aw-tauri/blob/master/README.md) to see the status of development, and where you can help out.

We are hopeful that it will help solve many of our remaining challenges, and are excited to see it help shape the future of ActivityWatch.
```
